the local ancestry calls were downloaded from the 1000 Genomes website. 

https://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/working/20140818_ancestry_deconvolution/

on Dec 5, 2025


These were generated in 2014, the original readme is provided below. 


##################################################################
#
# Local ancestry inference for 1000 Genomes Project phase 3 admixed samples
#
# 2014.07.21 - contact armartin@stanford.edu 
#
###########################################################################
#
# Data generated by the 1000 Genomes Project admixture working group:
#
#   Alicia Martin, Brian Maples, and Carlos Bustamante at Stanford University.
#   Simon Gravel and Soheil Baharian at McGill University.
#   Eimear Kenny at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
#
##########################################################################

This README describes the haploid local ancestry inference (LAI) tracts for phase 3 Afro-Caribbean from Barbardos (ACB), African American from the southwest US (ASW), Colombian (CLM), Mexican from Los Angeles (MXL), Peruvians from Lima (PEL), and Puerto Rican (PUR) individuals available on the 1000 Genomes Project ftp site (this directory), how they were generated, and summary information.

Files for each population are contained in zip files (*_phase3_ancestry_deconvolution.zip), with two bed files per individual , i.e., PUR/PopPhased/bed_files/HG00553_A.bed and PUR/PopPhased/bed_files/HG00553_B.bed. All tracts were generated with respect to hg19.

A. The LAI calls are in tab-delimited *.bed format and each file has 6 columns:

Column 1: chromosome number [1-22]
Column 2: start physical position of tract, base-0 (bp)
Column 3: end physical position of tract, base-1 (bp)
Column 4: haploid ancestry call of tract 
Column 5: start genetic position of on tract (cM)
Column 6: end genetic position of on tract (cM)

Haploid ancestry tract code:
AFR = African
EUR = European
NAT = Native American
UNK = masked (poorly called regions). These regions correspond to a maximum posterior probability of the ancestry called < 0.9. 
centromere = centromere regions of each chromosome as annotated by the UCSC genome browser. Each centromere is 3 Mb.
miscall = One additional mask region near the p arm of chromosome 15 was masked because it empirically was miscalled in the reference panel > 5% of the time. This ancestry tract is as follows:

Chromosome	start_physical_position	end_physical_position	tract_code	cM_start	cM_end
15	20071673	22422348	miscall	0.00597895782433	23.7084790611

A bed file with a list of regions masked out across all individuals (miscall and centromere) is included and name cent_miscall.bed.

This directory also contains global ancestry proportions for each population from source populations (European, African or Native American) constructed from collapsed diploid calls for each individual in files called lai_global_*.txt. The headers for the files indicate the proportion of a given ancestry as annotated with the haploid ancestry tract codes.

e.g. European Proportion = (sum[EUR/EUR] + ( (sum[EUR/AFR] + sum[EUR/NAT]) / 2) ) / sum[EUR+AFR+NAT+UNK]

Column 1: 1000 Genomes Project individual identifier
Column 2: Proportion African ancestry
Column 3: Proportion European ancestry
Column 4: Proportion Native American ancestry
Column 5: Proportion Unknown. Note: the unknown regions correspond to the haploid ancestry tract code "UNK" and does not include sites filtered out in all individual ("miscall" and "centromere").

Lastly, the local ancestry input files (alleles, snp_locations, classes, and sample files), which includes the reference panel and admixed samples for each run, that were used to generate the tracts are included for each subpopulation within rfmix_input directories, i.e. ACB/rfmix_input/ACB_rfmix_input.tar.gz.

Each population has the following directory structure, where [POP] is one of ACB, ASW, CLM, MXL, PEL, and PUR:

[POP]
[POP]/PopPhased: Phase-corrected data, see description 2.ii for run details (lai_global_*.txt)
[POP]/PopPhased/alleles_rephased: contains rephased alleles file from RFMix output (*allelesRephased5.txt.gz)
[POP]/PopPhased/bed_files: contains collapsed haploid bed files generated from RFMix output (*bed)
[POP]/PopPhased/karyograms: contains a *.png file per individual plotting all haploid karyograms (*png)
[POP]/TrioPhased: Phase-uncorrected data, see description 2.i for run details (lai_global_*.txt)
[POP]/TrioPhased/bed_files: contains collapsed haploid bed files generated from RFMix output (*bed)
[POP]/TrioPhased/karyograms: contains a *.png file per individual plotting all haploid karyograms (*png)
[POP]/rfmix_input: contains all RFMix input files and sample list to corresponding individual IDs (*alleles, *snp_locations, *map, *sample, *classes)

B. How the haploid ancestry calls were generated

The phased haplotypes were downloaded from the following ftp site:

ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/working/20130723_phase3_wg/shapeit2/

For a description of how the CEU and YRI individuals were phased, see the README in that directory. The NAT reference panel data [1] were population-phased similarly with SHAPEIT2 [2] using the phase 1 reference haplotypes. 50 random unrelated trio-phased CEU and YRI individuals and 43 NAT individuals with > 99% NAT ancestry were chosen as reference panel individuals.

We generated local ancestry calls using RFMix v1.5.4 [3], a discriminative local ancestry inference (LAI) method, which uses a discrete population approach exploiting allele frequency differences between several hypothesized ancestral or 'source' populations. For example, a Hispanic/Latino individual may have a combination of European, African, and Native American ancestry. LAI methods trained with European, African, and Native American reference panels may distinguish haplotypes or 'tracts' along each chromosome that map to one of the source populations. A link to the version of RFMix used is available here: https://www.dropbox.com/s/cmq4saduh9gozi9/RFMix_v1.5.4.zip. We generated these tracts in the following way:

1. Generated merged phased haplotypes from the files described above, accounting for allele flips between reference panels and inference individuals. This step was necessary because the NAT individuals genotyped on the Affy6.0 array and the data lifted over from b36 to b37, then were phased separately from the remaining individuals. The first allele listed in the SHAPEIT2 files from the ftp site listed above corresponds to the “A” haplotype tracts, and the second allele corresponds to the “B” tracts.

2. LAI tracts were called for both haplotypes of each chromosome per individual using RFMix in two ways: 

i.) TrioPhased - RFMix (v1.5.4) was run in TrioPhased mode with the following RFMix options: -w 0.5 (0.5 cM window size), and --forward-backward (output posterior probabilities). Because no phase-correction was performed, the alleles on each haplotype correspond one-to-one with those at the ftp site listed above.
ii.) PopPhased - RFMix was run in PopPhased mode (incorporate phase correction) with the following options: -w 0.5 (0.5 cM window size), --forward-backward (output posterior probabilities), --use-reference-panels-in-EM (incorporates reference panel in the EM iterations so that reference haplotypes are not lost through iterations), and -e 5 (run 5 EM iterations). The local ancestry calls at the 5th iteration of the EM were used. The rephased alleles and a sample file list have been added to their corresponding directories to indicate which allele corresponds to which ancestry. The alleles_rephased folders within the PopPhased folder have information about the allelic states and contains files with 3 extensions. The *.sample files are listed in the order in which individual haplotypes appear in the *allelesRephased5.txt. There are two haplotypes per individual. The *.map file contains SNP information in the following order:

Column 1 – Physical position
Column 2 – cM position (interpolated from the HapMap3 recombination map)

Each row in the *.map file corresponds to the same row in the *.allelesRephased5.txt file. The allelic state corresponding to 0’s and 1’s can be identified in the files at the ftp site above.

3. Haploid local ancestry calls were collapsed into tracts in a bed file per haploid chromosome. A karyogram per admixed individual was plotted. 3-way global ancestry estimates per African, European, and Native American ancestry were summarized across admixed individuals.

Finally, a link to parsing scripts that were used for this pipeline is available here: https://github.com/armartin/ancestry_pipeline.

#References

[1] X. Mao et al A genomewide admixture mapping panel for Hispanic/Latino 
populations. AJHG 80, 1171 (2007)
[2] O’Connell, J., Gurdasani, D., Delaneau, O., et al. (2014). A General Approach
for Haplotype Phasing across the Full Spectrum of Relatedness. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004234.
[3] Maples, B.K., Gravel, S., Kenny, E.E., and Bustamante, C.D. (2013). RFMix: A
Discriminative Modeling Approach for Rapid and Robust Local-Ancestry Inference. AJHG.
93, 278–288.

The Native American training data (Affymetrix 6.0 genotype data) is also available from this ftp site

ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/technical/working/20130711_native_american_admix_train/



